BRESCIA.
Thursday, July 26. I was only one day
in this town, but, it happening to be a
holiday, I had the good fortune to hear a
boy, at the church of the Jesuits delle
Grazie, whose voice and volubility pleased
me much. His name is Carlo Moschetti,
a scholar of Pietro Pellegrino, Maestra di
Capella of this church, who beat the
time during the performance of his mo¬
tet. This castrato is not above fourteen
or fifteen. He has a compass of two
octaves complete, from the middle C in
the scale to the highest. His voice is full,
when he has time to throw it out; and
he executes swift passages with such faci¬
lity, that he is apt to be lavish and run
riot, and now and then is not exactly in
tune. But there seems to be good stuff
for a master to work upon; his ſhake is
good, and he promises to be a great
singer. There was a young counter tenor,
of whom little is to be said; a tenor,
less; and a base that drove me out of
the church.
At a kind of Magdalen Hospital in this
place, the women were singing and play¬
ing most furioussy; the music was in the
old stile, full of fugues upon hackneyed
subjects. These females do the whole
business, upon such occasions, them¬
selves; play the organ, violins, and bases.
the performance indeed was so coarse,
that I had soon enough of it. I heard
no organs in this town that seemed to be
well toned, but then they are much or¬
namented, and, like the French opera,
more calculated to please the eye than
the ear. The pipes here are never gilt,
though sometimes the frame and case are,
and have not a bad effect.
The theatre at Brescia is very splendid,
but it is much less than that at Milan,
with respect to length; the height is the
same. The proportion of boxes round
each theatre is as one hundred to thirty¬
four: there are five rows in each, so that
this house seems much higher than that
at Milan. The boxes are more orna¬
mented with glasses, paintings, front¬
cloths of velvet, or rich silks fringed;
more room is allowed here in the pit, to
each auditor, than at Milan; every seat
turns up, and is locked till the person
comes who has taken it; and here every
row, and every box of each row, is num¬
bered, as in our playhouses, when the
pit and boxes are laid together. The
comedy was Il Saggio Amico, the Prudent
Friend, written by Goldoni; it was the
first I had ever seen in Italy without a
Harlequin, Colombine, Pierro, and Dot¬
tore: it was more like a regular comedy
than the Italian pieces usually are. There
was a Milordo Inglese in it, who gave away
his zechins by handfuls, with which the
audience was very much pleased. Some
of the actors came on with candles in
their hands; it never struck me before,
but, on the English and French stage,
where this is not practised, probability
suffers when the transactions of the piece
are supposed to happen in the night.
Here was a burletta in run, under the
direction of Signor Leopoldo Maria
Scherli, Maestro di Capella; the fingers
were Giovanni Simoni, Giuseppe Fran¬
ceschini, Niccola Menichelli, Angiola
Dotti, Geltrude Dotti, Teresa Menichel¬
li, Teresa Monti, but, for my misfortune,
they did not perform while I was at
Brescia.
At the sign of the Gambero or Lobster,
where I lodged, and in the next room to
mine, there was a company of opera
singers, who seemed all very jolly; they
were just come from Russia, where they
had been fourteen or fifteen years. The
principal singer among them, I found,
upon enquiry, to be the Castrato Luini
Bonetto. He is said to be still very rich,
though he lost in one night, at play, ten
thousand pounds of the money he had
gained per la sua virtù. He is a native
of Brescia; was welcomed home by a
band of music, at the inn, the night of his
arrival, and by another the night before
his and my departure, consisting of two
violins, a mandoline, French horn, trum¬
pet, and violoncello; and, though in the
dark, they played long concertos, with
ed online
solo parts for the mandoline. I was sur¬
prised at the memory of these performers;
in short, it was excellent street music,
and such as we are not accustomed to;
but ours is not a climate for serenades.
The famous Venetian dancer, La Colon¬
na, was likewise just arrived from Russia,
and in the same house; they were all
going to Venice.
