137 The day before my departure from Padua, I visited Signor Tromba, Tar¬tini's scholar and successor. He was so obliging as to play several of his master's solos, particularly two which he had made just before his death, of which I begged a copy, regarding these last drops of his pen as sacred relics of so great and original a genius. VENICE. I had many enquiries to make, and had very sanguine expectations from this city, with regard to the music of past times as well as the present. The church of St. Marc has had a constant supply of able masters, from the time of Adriano, Zarlino's predecessor, to Galuppi, its present worthy composer. Venice has likewise been one of the first cities in Europe that has cultivated the musical drama or cpera: and, in the graver stile, it has been honoured with a Lotti and a Mar¬ 138 Marcello. Add to these advantages the conservatorios established here, and the songs of the Gondolieri, or Water-men, which are so celebrated, that every musical collector of taste in Europe is well furnish¬ ed with them, and it will appear that my expectations were well grounded. The first music I heard here was in the street, immediately on my arrival, per¬ formed by an itinerant band of two fid¬ dles, a violoncello, and a voice, who, though as unnoticed here as small-coal¬ men or oyster-women in England, per¬ formed so well, that in any other coun¬ try of Europe they would not only have excited attention, but have acquired ap¬ plauſe, which they juſtly merited. Theſe two violins played difficult passages very neatly, the base stopped well in tune, and the voice, which was a woman's, was well toned, and had several essentials belonging to that of a good singer, such as compass, shake, and volubility; but I ſhall not mention all the performances of this kind 13 kind which I met with here; as they happened so frequently, the repetition would be tiresome. This city is famous for its conservato¬ rios or musical schools, of which it has four, the Ospidale della Pietà, the Mendi¬ canti, the Incurabile, and the Ospidalette a S. Giovanni e Paulo, at each of which there is a performance every Saturday and Sunday evening, as well as on great fes¬ tivals. I went to that of the Pietà, the evening after my arrival, Saturday, Au¬ gust 4. The present Maestro di Capella is Signor Furlanetti, a priest, and the per¬ formers, both vocal and instrumental, are all girls; the organ, violins, flutes, violoncellos, and even French horns, are supplied by these females. It is a kind of Foundling Hospital for natural chil¬ dren, under the protection of several nobles, citizens, and merchants, who, though the revenue is very great, yet contribute annually to its support. These girls are maintained here till they are married, 140 married, and all those who have talents for music are taught by the best masters of Italy. The composition and perform¬ ance I heard to-night did not exceed mediocrity; among the singers I could discover no remarkable fine voice, or performer possessed of great taste. How¬ ever, the instruments finished with a sym¬ phony, the first movement of which, in point of spirit, was well written and executed. On Sunday morning, August 5, I went to the Greek church, which has been to¬ lerated here ever since the time of Leo X The service is performed in the Greek language; the epistles and gospels are chanted by a high-priest in a pulpit, and the prayers and responses are sung in a kind of melody totally different from any other I had ever heard in or out of the church. In this there is no organ, but it is more crowded with ornaments, and its ceremonials are more numerous than in any of the Romish churches. From I 141 From thence I went to St. Marc’s, and heard a mass in music, which was sun¬ by the priests, accompanied by the organ only, much in the manner of our full an¬ thems. At St. Luke's church I l'kewise heard part of a mass with instruments; some of the tenor voices here were good, and the airs written and sung with taste; the music was composed by a priest. There was an excellent fugue in the last chorus, well worked and well performed. In the afternoon of the same day I went to the hospital de Mendicanti, for orphan girls, who are taught to sing and play, and on Sundays and festivals they sing divine service in chorus. Signor Bertoni is the present Maestro di Capella. There was a hymn performed with solos and chorusses, and a mottetto à voce sola, which last was very well performed, par¬ ticularlyan accompanied recitative, which was pronounced with great force and energy. Upon the whole, the composi¬ tions had some pretty passages, mixed with 142 with others that were not very new. The subjects of the fugues and chorusses were trite, and but slightly put together. The girls here I thought accompanied the voices better than at the Pietà: as the chorusses are wholly made up of female voices, they are never in more than three parts, often only in two; but these, when re¬ inforced by the instruments, have such an effect, that the full complement to the chords is not missed, and the melody is much more sensible and marked, by be¬ ing less charged with harmony. In these hospitals many of the girls sing in the counter tenor as low as A and G, which enables them always to keep below the soprano and mezzo soprano, to which they sing the base; and this seems to have been long practised in Italy, as may be seen in the examples of composition given in the old writers, such as Zarlino, Glariano, Kircher, and others, where the lowest part of three is often written in the counter-tenor clef. From [ 143 From hence I went to the Ospidaletto, of which Signor Sacchini is the master, and was indeed very much pleased by the composition of part of the famous hymn Salve Regina, which was singing when I entered the church; it was new, spirited, and full of ingenious contrivances for the instruments, which always said something interesting without disturbing the voice. Upon the whole, there seemed to be as much genius in this composition as in any I had heard since my arrival in Italy. The performers here too are all orphan girls; one of them, la Ferrarese, sung very well, and had a very extraordinary compass of voice, as ſhe was able to reach the high¬ est E of our harpsichords, upon which ſhe could dwell a considerable time, in a fair, natural voice. Even after this, upon the Piazza di S. Marco, I heard a great number of va¬ grant musicians, some in bands, accom¬ panying one or two voices; sometimes a single voice and guitar; and sometimes two I 144 or three guitars together. Indeed it is not to be wondered at, that the street¬ music here is generally neglected, as peo¬ ple are almost stunned with it at every corner; but, however, in justice to the taste and discernment of the Italians, it must be allowed, that when they do ad¬ mire, it is something excellent; and then; they never“ damn with faint praise, but express rapture in a manner peculiar to themselves; they seem to agonize with pleasure too great for the aching sense. They had here, last Carnival, seven opera-houses open at once, three serious, and four comic, besides four play-houses, and these were all crowded every night. Monday 6. This morning the Doge went in procession to the church of S. Giovanni e Paolo. I was not only curious to see this procession, but to hear the music, which I expected would be very considerable, and by a great band; how¬ ever there was only a mass sung in four parts, 145 parts, without other instrument than the organ, but then it was so good of the kind, so well executed and accompanied, that I do not remember to have received more pleasure from such music. One of the organists of St. Mark's church, who is in orders, attended, and discovered himself, in his voluntaries and interludes, to be a very masterly performer. The voices were well chosen, and well assorted, no one stronger than the other; the com¬ position was of Signor Lotti, and was truly grave and majestic, consisting of fugues and imitations in the stile of our best old church services, which have been so well selected, and published in so magnificent a manner by Dr. Boyce; all was clear and distinct, no confusion or unnecessary notes; it was even capable of expression, particularly one of the movements, into which the performers entered so well, that it affected me even to tears. The organist here very judicioussy suffered the voices to be heard in all their purity, in¬ somuch 146 somuch that I frequently forgot that they were accompanied; upon the whole this seems to be the true stile for the church: it calls to memory nothing vulgar, light, or prophane; it disposes the mind to phil¬ anthrophy, and divests it of its gross and sensual passions. Indeed my being moved was the mere effect of well-modulated and well-measured sounds, for I knew not the words, which were wholly loſt by the distance; nor is this species of music at all favourable to poetry: in the answers that are made to the points, the several parts all sing different words, so that no great effects can be produced by them; but notwithstanding this defect, such music as this, in the service of the church, must ever be allowed to have its merit, however it may be exploded, or unfit for theatrical purposes. In consequence of a message from Mr. Richie, Chargé des Affaires to his Britan¬ nic Majesty, to whom Sir James Wright had honoured me with a letter, and who very 147 very politely and kindly was pleased to interest himself effectually in my service, I was this afternoon favoured with a visit from Signor Latilla, an eminent composer here, and had a long conversation with him relative to the subject of my journey. I found him to be a plain, sensible man, of about sixty years of age, who had both read and thought much concerning the music of the ancients, as well as that of the moderns, to which he has contri¬ buted a considerable share for many years past *. I admired his candour in advising me to go to the Incurabili, to hear the girls perform there, with whom he said I ſhould be much pleased. They are scho¬ lars of Signor Galuppi, who is Maestro di Capella of this Conservatorio. Unluckily when I arrived there, the performance was begun, however, I had only lost the * Most of the comic operas performed in Lon¬ don with such success, in the time of Pertici and Laschi, were of Latilla's composition; particularly La Comedia in Comedia, Don Calascione, and others. He is uncle to Signor Piccini. L 2 over¬ University P ublished online by Ca ( 148 overture, and part of the first air. The words were taken from three or four of the Psalms in Latin, from the hymn Salve Regina, and one of the Canticles put into Latin verse, and in dialogue. I knew not whether I was moſt delighted with the composition, or with the execu¬ tion; both were admirable. Signor Bu¬ ranello has preserved all his fire and ima¬ gination from the chill blasts of Russia, This in¬ whence he is lately returned* genious, entertaining, and elegant com¬ poser abounds in novelty, in spirit, and in delicacy, and his scholars did his mu¬ sic great justice. Several of them had un¬ common talents for singing, particularly the Rota, Pasqua Rossi, and the Ortolani; the two last sung the Canticle in dialogue. The overture, and the whole of this last performance were for two orchestras. In the overture, which was full of pretty * Signor Galuppi is best known in Italy by the name of Buranello, which he acquired from having been born in the little issand of Burano, near Venice. He is replaced at Petersburg by Signor Traetta. pas- 149 1 passages, the two bands echoed each other. There were two organs, and two pair of French horns. In short, I was extreme¬ ly entertained by this performance, and the whole company, which was very nu- merous, seemed equally pleased. The young singers, just mentioned, are abso¬ lute nightingales; they have a facility of executing difficult divisions equal to that of birds. They did such things in that way, especially the Rota, as I do not remember to have heard attempted be¬ fore. The able master was discoverable in all the cadences of these young sub¬ jects. The instrumental parts were very well executed, and the whole indicated a superior genius in the composer and con¬ ductor of the performance. This music, which was of the higher sort of theatric stile, though it was performed in a church, was not mixed with the church service, and the audience sat the whole time as at a concert; and, indeed, this might L 3 150 might be called a concerto spirituale with great propriety. Tuesday 7. This morning there was a mass in musie at the church of S. Gaetano. It being a great festival, all the treasures and relics were exposed to public view, and there was a very great crowd. The composer of the music, and the person who beat the time was Signor Menagatto, a priest; I cannot say that I received much pleasure from this performance, the organ was coarse, and poorly played; the voices only two indifferent tenors, and a base, and the composition very com¬ mon, and unmarked by any stamp of ori¬ ginal genius. The people here, at this season, seem to begin to live only at midnight. Then the canals are crowded with gondolas, and St. Mark's square with company; the banks too of the canals are all peo¬ pled, and harmony prevails in every part. If two of the common people walk toge¬ ther arm in arm, they seem to converse I 151 in song; if there is company on the water, in a gondola, it is the same; a mere me¬ lody, unaccompanied with a second part, is not to be heard in this city: all the ballads in the streets are sung in duo. Luckily for me, this night, a barge, in which there was an excellent band of music, consisting of violins, flutes, horns, bases, and a kettle-drum, with a pretty good tenor voice, was on the great canal, and stopped very near the house where I lodged; it was a piece of gallantry, at the expence of an inamorato in order to senerade his mistress. Shakespeare says of nocturnal music, & Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day. * Silence bestows the virtue on it—I think * The nightingale, if ſhe ſhould sing by day, * When every goose is cackling, would be thought t No better a musician than the wren. Whether the time, place, and manner of performing this music, gave it adventi¬ tious and collateral charms, I will not pretend to say; all I know is, that the sympho¬ L4 I 152 symphonies seemed to me to be admirable, full of fancy, full of fire; the passages well contrasted; sometimes the graceful, sometimes the pathetic prevailed; and sometimes, however strange it may be thought, even noise and fury had their effect. No one will I believe, at present, deny the necessity of discord in the com¬ position of music in parts; it seems to be as much the essence of music, as ſhade is of painting; not only as it improves and meliorates concord by opposition and comparison, but, still further, as it be¬ comes a necessary stimulus to the atten¬ tion, which would languish over a suc¬ cession of pure concords. It occasions a momentary distress to the ear, which re¬ mains unsatisfied, and even uneasy, till it hears something better; for no musical phrase can end upon a discord, the ear must be satisfied at last. Now, as discord is allowable, and even necessarily opposed to concord, why may not noise, or a seem¬ ing jargon, be opposed to fixed sounds and 3Published online by Cambridge Universi 153 1 und harmonical proportion? Some of the discords in modern music, unknown till this century, are what the ear can but just bear, but have a very good effect as to contrast. The severe laws of prepar¬ ing and resolving discord, may be too much adhered to for great effects; I am convinced, that provided the ear be at length made amends, there are few dis¬ sonances too strong for it. If, for in¬ stance, the five sounds c. d. e. f. g, are all struck at the same instant on the harp¬ sichord, provided the d and the f are taken soon off, and the three others re¬ main, the ear will not suffer much by the first shock. Or, still further; if, in¬ stead of the five sounds above-mentioned, the following are struck; c. dx. e. fx. g and the d and ff are not held on so long as thè rest, all will end to the satis¬ faction of the offended ear. Wednesday 8. This day was remark- able for no enquiry relative to the pre¬ sent state of music in Italy; however it deserves 1541 deserves mention here, on account of the opportunity it afforded me of conversing with the Abate Martini, one of the best judges of every part of music, ancient and modern, that I had yet met with. He is an able mathematician, a composer, and performer. He had travelled into Grecce, in order to make observations in geography, agriculture, and natural his¬ tory, but being unable to satisfy himself as he expected, his pride was so hurt by the disappointment, that he would not publish any of his remarks or discove¬ ries. Among other curious enquires, he made many concerning the music of the modern Greeks, in hopes it would throw some light upon that of the an¬ cient. He knows, I believe, as much as any one else, about the systems of Pytha¬ goras, Ptolemy, and the writers collected by Meibomius, as well as of Rameau and Tartini. He is a great admirer of the works of Marcello, and sings by heart all his cantatas and best melodies. After reading I 155 1 reading my plan, which we discussed ar¬ ticle by article, he entered much into my views; shewed me his Grecian and other manuscript papers, and I had great reason to be satisfied both with my reception, and the information with which he favoured me. 9th. I had this afternoon another long conversation with the same learned gen¬ tleman, who was so obliging as to bring his manuscript papers concerning Greek music, and to desire my acceptance of them. I could not help regarding this present as a valuable acquisition, for though the materials it contained were too few for his original purpose of form¬ ing a booi, they appeared likely to be of importance in the course of a work, in which it is proposed to treat not only of ancient music, but of the national music of most parts of the world, from whence specimens, or accounts well au¬ thenticated can be had. The Abate has, however, collected a set of apophthegms or pro¬ 156 proverbs, which he intends to publish, and which will discover the manners and misery of the modern Greeks, per¬ haps more effectually than any other work could do. There was music this evening at the church of St. Laurence, composed and directed by Signor Sacchini, at which, as it was the vigil of this saint, there was a great crowd. I suffered, as well as every one else, too much by the heat, perhaps, to be easily pleased, and the composition seemed rather more common than that I had heard of this ingenious master before; however, the vocal parts were not so well performed, as there were no other singers than those of St. Mark's church, who most excel in mere church music, accompanied only by the organ. The voices were not good enough sor long solo parts, nor strong enough to get through a large band; however there were many very pleasing and agreeable movements, and some of the chorusses were 157 were well worked in the fugue and orato¬ rio way. But for this kind of music, that of Handel will, I believe, ever stand su¬ perior to all other writers; at least I have heard nothing yet on the continent of equal force and effect. There is often in the compositions of others, more me¬ lody in the solo parts, more delicacy, and more light and shade, but as to harmony and contrivance, no one comes near him by many degrees. I must confess that I had heard some of Handel's music so long, and often so ill performed, that I was somewhat tired and disgusted with it; but my Italian journey, instead of lower¬ ing the esteem I ever had for the best writings of that truly great artist, exalted them in my opinion, and at my return renewed my pleasure in hearing them performed. As yet I had heard little but church music in Italy; however, in that stile, with instruments, all other com¬ positions appeared feeble by comparison. The subjects of the fugues were, in gene¬ ral, 158 1 ral, trivial and common, and the manner of working them dry and artless. Indeed the church stile, without instruments, ex¬ cept the organ, was well known in Italy, and all over Europe, long before Han¬ del's time; and melody is certainly much refined since. it is more graceful, more pathetic, and even more gay; but for counter-point, fugues, and chorusses of many voices, with instruments, I repeat it, I neither have heard, nor do I ever expect to hear him equalled. 10th. This morning I went again to the church of the convent of St. Lau¬ rence, where, besides a mass of Signor Sacchini's composition, I heard Signor Nazzari, the first violin of Venice, play a concerto; but we have long heard that instrument so well performed upon in England, that nothing is left to admire. However, Signor Nazzari is certainly a very neat and pleasing player; his tone is even, sweet, and full; he plays with great facility and expression, and is, upon the whole, I 159 whole, the best solo player I had heard on this side the Alps. Argus is said to have had an hundred eyes, and Fame has been painted by the poets all tongues; in this place one wishes to be all ears for music, and all eyes for painting and architecture. To-day there were so many temptations to a lover of harmony, that it was difficult for him to chuse; for, besides the four conservato¬ rios, there were several accademias or pri¬ vate concerts. I was invited to one, which assembles on all festivals, in order to sing the works of Marcello, without other accompaniment than a harpsichord; and as this was different from any other I had been at in Italy, I accepted the invi¬ tation, though I wished very much to be at the Incurabili, where I was sure of entertainment from Buranello and his scholars. Several of Marcello's Psalms were here very well sung by the Abate Martini and some other dilettanti, among whom one had 160 had a very good base voice, and, between the Psalms, sung Marcello s famous can¬ tata called Cassandra, where this com¬ poser has entirely sacrificed the music to the poetry, by changing the time or stile of his movement at every new idea which occurs in the words; this may, perhaps, ſhew a composer to be a very sensible man, but at the same time it must dis¬ cover him to be of a very phlegmatic turn, and wholly free from the enthusi¬ asm of a creative musical genius. And, indeed, since melody has been allied to grace and fancy, musical disjointed thoughts on various subjects, would be but ill received by the public. One of these gentlemen performers was old enough to remember very well the ce¬ lebrated Benedetto Marcello, who has been dead forty-four years, and gave me several anecdotes about him; his family, which is noble, still subsists, and the head of it is now ambassador from the Vene¬ tian state at the Porte. 11th. 161 11th. This afternoon I went again to the Pietà; there was not much company, and the girls played a thousand tricks in singing, particularly in the duets, where there was a trial of skill and of natural powers, as who could go higheſt, loweſt, swell a note the longest, or run divisions with the greateſt rapidity. They always finish with a symphony; and last Wednes¬ day they played one by Sarte, which I had before heard in England, at the opera of the Olimpiade. The band here is cer¬ tainly very powerful, as there are in the hospital above a thousand girls, and out of these there are seventy musicians, vocal and instrumental; at each of the other three hospitals there are not above forty, as I was informed by Signor L’A¬ tilla, which are chosen out of about a hundred orphans, as the orignal establish¬ ment requires. But it has been known that a child, with a fine voice, has been taken into these hospitals before it was be¬ reaved of father or mother. Children are some¬ I 162 sometimes brought hither to be educated from the towns belonging to the Vene¬ tian state, upon the Continent; from Padua, Verona, Brescia, and even from other places, still more distant; for Fran¬ cesca Gabrieli came from Ferrara, and is therefore called the Ferrarese. The Con¬ servatorio of the Pietà has heretofore been the most celebrated for its band, and the Mendicanti for voices; but in the voices time and accident may occasion great al¬ terations; the master may give a celebrity to a school of this kind, both by his com¬ positions and abilities in teaching; and as to voices, nature may sometimes be more kind to the subjects of one hospi¬ tal than another; but as the number is greater at the Pietà than at the rest, and consequently the chances of supe¬ rior qualifications more, it is natural to suppose that this hospital will in general have the best band and the best voices. At present, the great abilities of Signor Galuppi are conspicuous in the perform¬ ances I 163 unces at the Incurabili, which is, in point of music, singing, and orchestra, in my opinion, superior to the rest. Next to that, the Ospidaletto takes place of the other two; so that the Pietà seems to enjoy the reputation of being the best school, not for what it does now, but for what it has done, heretofore. Sunday 12. This morning, after hear¬ ing high mass well performed at St. Mark s, I went to the patriarchal church of St. Peter, and heard it again there, accompanied by a very fine organ, well played on by one of the priests; after that I went to the Franciscans church, where one of the Friars likewise was or¬ ganist, but he played in a very superior manner, both as to taste and harmony. though I visited these churches for the sake of music, it was impossible to keep my eyes off the pictures and architecture. But it was here I began to find that these two objects of sight were not so remote from my chief purpose of writing a his¬ tory M 2 164 tory of the pleasures of the ear, as I at first imagined; for I frequently, in the old masters, met with representations of musical instruments, either of their own times, or at least such as they imagined to be in use at the time when the action of the piece happened; thus I observed in a famous picture of the Marriage of Cana by P. Veronese, in the Sacristy of S. Georgio Maggiore, a con¬ cert, with a variety of instruments, of all which I have made a memorandum: and I saw this morning, at the Franciscans, a little picture under the pulpit, by San Croce, which is much admired, and thought to be a good deal in the stile of Raphael, in which is a concert of che¬ rubs and seraphs; and I observed among several different kinds of lutes and gui¬ tars, an instrument played with a bow, resting, like a violin, upon the ſhoulder of the performer, but it had six strings. After I had seen these, and some more churches, I had the honour of a long con¬ 1651 conversation with il Conte Torre Taxis, who is here a person of great weight * he is Superintendant-general of the Ger¬ man and Venetian post-office, was a great friend of Tartini, is now in possession of all his MS. compositions, ſhewed me a great number of them, and has defended his friend in a pamphlet, of which he did me the honour to give me a copy, against some remarks made upon his Trat¬ tato di Musica, by M. Rousseau, in his Dict. de Musique. This nobleman, though young, seems to possess great musical eru¬ dition; to have profited from the converse and correspondence of Tartini, and to be an enthusiast for the arts in general. I had great pleasure in his conversation, in which I communicated to him my plan of a History of Music, and was pleased and enlightened by his observations. * He is of the same family with that German prince, better known in France and England by the name of Tour Taxis. In M 3 166 In the afternoon I stopped a little while at the new church of the Jesuati, where I heard the organ played with a very un¬ common brilliancy of execution, by one of the Dominicans. It was indeed a stile of playing more suitable to the harp¬ sichord than organ, but, in its way, was very masterly and powerful. There are some reed stops in this instrument which I had never heard before, and with which the performer produced effects that I was unable to account for. I had not time to make enquiries, as I took this church only in my way to the Incurabili, where I was so pleased, both with the compo¬ sition and performance, that in speaking of them I shall find it difficult to avoid hyperboles. It seems as if the genius of Signor Galuppi, like that of Titian, became more animated by age. He cannot now be less than seventy years old, and yet it is generally allowed here that his last operas, and his last compositions for the church, abound 167 abound with more spirit, taste, and fancy, than those of any other period of his life. This evening the Latin Psalms that were sung by the orphan girls, gave me great reason to concur in the common opinion, for out of ten or twelve movements, there was not one that could be pronoun¬ ced indifferent. There were several admi¬ rable, accompanied recitatives, and the whole abounded with new passages, with good taste, good harmony, and good sense. His accompaniments, in particular, are al¬ ways ingenious, but, though full, free from that kind of confusion which dis¬ turbs and covers the voice. I must like¬ wise do juſtice to the orcheſtra, which is here under the most exact discipline; no one of the instrumental performers seemed ambitious of shining at the expence of the vocal part, but all were under that kind of subordination which is requisite in a servant to a superior. Of these young singers I have spoken rather warm¬ ly before, but in this performance they dis¬ M4 168 discovered still new talents and new cul¬ tivation. Their music of to-night was rather more grave than that which I had heard here before, and I thought they were more firm in it; that their intona¬ tions were more exact, and, as more time was allowed for it, a greater volume of voice by the two principal subjects was thrown out. But in their closes, I know not which astonished me most, the com¬ pass of voice, variety of passages, or rapi¬ dity of execution; indeed all were such as would have merited and received great applause in the first operas of Europe. I dwell the longer on these performances, as, at present, the theatres of Venice are all ſhut; but the only difference between this kind of church music, and that of the drama, consists in the chorusses; those of the church are long, elaborate, and sometimes well written. Those who suppose all the church music of Italy to be as light and airy as that of the opera, are mistaken; it is only on festivals that modern 169 modern music can be heard in any of the churches. The music of the cathedrals, on common days, is in a stile as grave and as ancient as that of our church services of two hundred years standing; and in the parish churches it is a mere canto fermo, or chant, sung in unison by the priests only; sometimes with the organ, but more frequently without. If we compare the music os Mr. Handel's first oratorios with the operas he com¬ posed about the same time, it will ap¬ pear that the airs of the one are often as gay as those of the other. And as to the chorusses of an opera, which are all to be in action, and performed by memory, they must of course be shorter and less la¬ boured than those of an oratorio, where every singer has his part before him, and where a composer is allowed sufficient time to display his abilities in every spe¬ cies of what is called by musicians good writing. From 170 1 From the Incurabili I had the honour to be carried by his Excellency Signor Murin Giorgi, to an accademia, at the Casa Grimani, where I first had the pleasure to hear Signora Baffa, a noble Venetian lady. She has long been rec¬ koned the best performer on the harpsi¬ chord of all the ladies of Venice; and I found that ſhe played very neatly, and with much taste and judgment. The company consisted of the chief nobility of Venice, the three persons Ihave named being among the first class. They did great justice in this assembly to the abili¬ ties of Mrs. Cassandra Wynn, from Eng¬ land, who was there last year, and had left behind her the character of a very great player. Tuesday 14. This evening being the vigil of the Assumption, there were mu¬ sical performances at three different churches. I went first to that of the Celestia; the vespers were composed and directed by the Maestro of the Pietà, Signor I 171 Signor Furlanetto; there were two or¬ chestras, both well filled with vocal and instrumental performers. the overture was spirited, and the first chorus good, in Contra Punto; then there was a long symphony in dialogue, between the two orchestras, and an air well accompanied, though but indifferently sung. After this an air in dialogue with the chorus, which had a good effect: an air for a tenor voice, of little merit, and one for a base, which was ingenioussy put together, making use by turns of all the principal in¬ struments: I did not stay out the whole per¬ formance, but what Iheard seemed superior to any composition that I had before met with of this author; he availed himself of the two orchestras, and produced se¬ veral effects which, with one, would have been impracticable. From hence I went to the Ospidaletto, where the music and musicians spoke a different language. The performance was a Latin oratorio; Machabaeorum Mater; the 172 the music was by Signor Sacchini; there were six characters in it, the principal was persormed by Francesca Gabrieli: it was divided into two parts; the first was over before I arrived, for which I was very sorry, as what remained delighted me extremely, both as to the composi¬ tion, which was excellent, and the sing¬ ing which had infinite merit. When I entered the church the Ferrarese was speaking an admirable accompanied re¬ citative in such a manner as is seldom heard; it was terminated by a Bravura air, with a pathetic second part in Jo¬ melli's oratorio style, but by no means in his passages; there was then a recita¬ tive and slow air by Laura Conti, who is possessed of no great power of voice; it is a mere voce di Camera; but she has in¬ finite expression and taste, and charmed me in a different way. then followed ano¬ ther recitative, and after it a duet, which was truly sublime; it was extremely well executed by Domenica Pasquati and Ippolita I 1731 Ippolita Santi; upon the whole, Signor Sacchini rises in my opinion, and accord¬ ing to my feelings and intelligence he is the second in Venice, having no superior there but Signor Galuppi. The singing I heard at this hospital to-night would, as well as that of the Mendicanti, I am certain, receive great applause in the first opera of Europe. Wednesday 15. I went this morning to St. Mark’s church, at which, being a festival, the doge was present. I there heard high mass performed under the direction of Signor Galuppi, composer of the music. Upon this occasion there were six orchestras, two great ones in the galleries of the two principal organs, and four less, two on a side, in which there were likewise ſmall organs. I was placed very advantageoussy in one of the great organ lofts, with Signor L'Atilla, The mu¬ assistant to Signor Galuppi* * This instrument has pedals, and but one row of box keys. sic, I 174 sic, which was in general full and grave, had a great effect, though this church is not very happily formed for music, as it has five domes or cupolas, by which the sound is too much broken and reverbe¬ rated before it reaches the ear. From hence I went again to the Celestià, which church was very much crowded. The mass was set to music by Signor Furlanetto, master to the Pictà: the re¬ sources of this composer are very few; he has little fire and less variety, but he sins more on the side of genius than learning, as his harmony is good, and modulation regular and warrantable; but I must own, that his music is to me tiresome, and leaves behind it a languor and dissatis¬ faction; wher as that of Signor Galuppi and Sacchini always exhilerates and en¬ livens. Signor Nazari played here a concerto on the violin in a very neat and pleasing manner. I know not of whoſe composition, but it was by no means remarkable for novelty. After dinner I went I 175 1 went to the church of Santa Maria Mag. giore to see some pictures, and stumbled on music, but such music as I did not think it possible for the people of Italy to bear. The organ was out of tune, other instruments out of time, and the voices were both; then the composition seemed just such stuff as a boy who was learning counter-point would produce after the first two or three lessons. After I had seen the two best pictures in the church, the famous St. John the Baptist, by Titian, and Noah's ark by Giacomo Bassano, I ran away from this music to the Incurabili, where Buranello's nightin¬ gales, the Rota, and Pasqua Rossi, poured balm into my wounded ears. There was not much company, and the girls did not exert themselves; however, after what I had just heard, their performance was ravishing; and it was not without regret that I reflected upon this being the last time I ſhould hear it. Thursday 1761 Thursday 16. My visit to Signor Ga¬ luppi this morning was long, profitable, and entertaining. I was very glad to find upon seeing him, that time had spared the person as well as genius of this excellent composer. He is still live¬ ly and alert, and likely to delight the lovers of music many years. His cha¬ racter and conversation are natural, in¬ telligent, and agreeable. He is in figure little and thin, but has very much the look of a gentleman. Signor Galuppi was a scholar of the famous Lotti, and very early taken notice of as a good harp¬ fichord player, and a genius in compo¬ sition. He was so obliging as to present me to Signora Galuppi; to ſhew me his house; an admirable picture of a sleeping child, by P. Veronese, which has been long in his wife's family; and to carry me into his working-room, with only a little clavichord in it, where, he told me, he dirtied paper. His family has been very large, but all his children, except three I 177 three or four, are now well married. He has the appearance of a regular family man, and is esteemed at Venice as much for his private character as for his public talents. He seems, however, rather hurt at the encouragement and protection which some ecclesiastical dunces, among whom is F—, meet with as composers here. Indeed, except Sacchini, his se¬ cond, he stands so high among the present race of musicians in Venice, that he seems a giant among dwarfs: he was so obliging, at my request, as to promise me a piece of his composition, which has not yet been made public, as a relick and mark of his friendſhip. I ſhewed him my plan, and we talked over that, and music and musicians, very cordially, and with similar sentiments: his definition of good music I think admirable, and though short, very comprehensive. It consists, he fays, ot vaghezza, chiarezza, e buo¬ na modulazione*. He and Signor LA¬ * Beauty, clearness, and geod modulation. tilla, 178 tilla, among many other particulars, re¬ collected the names of all the great masters of the conservatorios, and had patience to let me write them down. These gentle¬ men likewise informed me that the ex¬ pence of the conservatorios, on account of music, is very inconsiderable, there being but sive or six masters to each for singing and the several instruments, as the elder girls teach the younger. The Macstro di Capella seldom does more than compose and direct: sometimes, indeed, he writes down closes, and usually attends the last rehearsal and first public perform¬ ance. A succession of able masters has con¬ stantly been employed in these schools: Hasse was once Maestro to the Incurabili, and has left a Miserere, which is still per¬ formed there in Passion Week, and 18, according to the Abate Martini, a won¬ derful composition * I obtained, before I left Venice, a copy of it; and since my arrival in England, I have been honoured I 179 Signor Galuppi seemed to have full employment here, even in summer, when there are no operas, as he is first Maestro di Capella of St. Mark, and of the Incura¬ bili. He has a hundred zechins a year as domestic organist to the family of Gritti, and is organist of another church, of which Ihave forgot the name. He cer¬ tainly merits all that can be done for him, being one of the few remaining original geniusses of the best school per¬ haps that Italy ever saw. His composi¬ tions are always ingenious and natural, and I may add, that he is a good contra¬ puntist, and a friend to poetry. The first appears by his scores, and the latter by the melodies he sets to words, in which the expression of his music al¬ ways corresponds with the sense of the author, and often improves it. His com¬ positions for the church are but little honoured with a letter from Count Bujovich, of Venice, with several interesting particulars relative to the rise and progress of these musical institutions. N 2 known 180 known in England; to me they ap¬ pear excellent*; for though many of the airs are in the opera stile, yet, upon oc¬ casion, he ſhews himself to be a very able writer in the true church stile, which is grave, with good harmony, good mo¬ dulation, and fugues well worked. I was this evening at a second Acca¬ demia, at Signor Grimani's, which was much more considerable than the first. Signor Sacchini was there, and several of the principal musicians of Venice. La Signora Regina Zocchi, a lady who had her musical education at the Incurabili, under the celebrated Signor Hasse, and who is now well married, and re¬ ceived, and even courted by the first people here, sung: ſhe has a very power¬ ful voice, and good ſhake, with great volu¬ bility and expression. D. Flaminio Tomj, who has a mere Voce di Camera, sung *I procured at Venice, some of his motets; and Giaseppe, an excellent copiest there, undertook to transcribe, and send after me, two or three of his masses. with I 181 1 with exquisite taste. La Signora Baffa performed on the harpsichord, two or three concertos with much grace and pre¬ cision. Add to this, that the whole was well heard by a very large company, com¬ posed of the first nobility of Venice, a¬ mong whom was Signor Mocenigo, son to the present doge. Friday 17. I had this morning the honour of a second interview with Count Torre Taxis, during which, I had the pleasure to hear his excellen¬ cy perform on the harpsichord, of which instrument he is an able master; he played voluntaries for a considerable time, in which he discovered much skill in modulation, and I found him worthy of a place on the upper form of the Tar¬ tini school. He shewed me a great num¬ ber of masses, motets, and oratorios of his composition, for though young, he is already a very voluminous writer. He is possessed of a very curious keyed instru¬ ment which was made at Berlin, under the 182 the direction of his Prussian Majesty: it is, in ſhape, like a large clavichord, has several changes ofstops, and is occasionally a harp, a harpsichord, a lute, or piano forte; but the most curious property of this instrument is, that by drawing out the keys the hammers are transferred to different strings, by which means a com¬ position may be transposed half a note, a whole note, or a flat third lower at plea¬ sure, without the embarrassment of dif¬ ferent notes or clefs, real or imagi¬ nary. Among the Dilettanti here, besides Count Taxis, there is a noble Venetian, Signor Giovan Cornaro, remarkable for his genius and skill in composition: he had composed a mass for a great festival at a church in Padua, which was per¬ formed there, while I was at Venice, with an immense band of voices and instru¬ ments. This evening, in order to make my¬ self more fully acquainted with the na¬ ture 1831 ture of the conservatorios, and to finissi my musical enquiries here, I obtained permission to be admitted into the music school of the Mendicanti, and was fa¬ voured with a concert, which was per¬ formed wholly on my account, and lasted two hours, by the best vocal and instru¬ mental performers of this hospital: it was really curious to see, as well as to hear¬ every part of this excellent concert, per¬ formed by females, violins, tenors, bases, harpsichord, French horns, and even double bases; and there was a prioress, a person in years, who presided: the first violin was very well played by Antonia Cubli, of Greek extraction; the harpsi¬ chord sometimes by Francesca Rossi, maestra del coro, and sometimes by others; these young persons frequently change instruments. The singing was really ex¬ cellent in different stiles; Laura Risegari and Giacoma Frari, had very powerful voices, capable of filling a large theatre; these sung bravura songs, and capital N4 scenes 184 scenes selected from Italian operas; and Francesca Tomj, sister to the Abate of that name, and Antonia Lucuvich, whose voices were more delicate, confined themselves chiefly to pathetic songs, of taste and expression. The whole was very judiciously mixed; no two airs of a sort followed each other, and there seemed to be great decorum and good discipline observed in every particular; for these admirable performers, who are of different ages, all behaved with great propriety, and seemed to be well edu¬ cated. It was here that the two cele¬ brated female performers, the Archiapate, now Signora Guglielmi, and Signora Maddalena Lombardini Sirmen, who have received such great and just applause in England, had their musical instructions. If I could have staid a few days longer at Venice, I might have enjoyed the same kind of entertainment at the other three conservatorios, having been tempted to continue there by such an offer from a friend 185 J friend who had interest sufficient to pro¬ cure me a sight of the interior discipline of these admirable musical seminaries; and I declined this obliging offer with the greater reluctance, as there is not in all Italy, any establishment of the same kind; but being willing to divide the time I had allowed myself for the en¬ quiries I had to make there as equally as possible, I resisted that temptation as well as several other offers with which I was honoured, from some of the principal nobility, of being admitted to their private concerts; and thus far for the honour of Italy, as well as for my own, I must say, that I met with the politest treatment, and greatest encouragement and assistance imaginable, wherever I stopt. At Venice my expectations were greatly surpassed, as 1 had always been told that the inhabitants, particularly the better sort, were reserved and difficult of access. 186 I was indebted for much of my enter¬ tainment and information at Venice, to the assiduity and friendihip of Mr. Ed¬ wards, a young gentleman who was born in England, but has lived so long in this city, that he has wholly loſt his verna¬ nacular tongue. With this gentleman, and D. Flaminio Tomj, I went from the Conservatorio of the Mendicanti, to Signor Grimani's. here the Abate Tomj sung two or three pathetic airs with more taste than I can remember to have heard since the death of Palma. There was a great deal of company, and the musical perfor¬ mances of various kinds continued till two or three o'clock in the morning; at which time I took a melancholy leave of Signor Grimani, who had honoured me with something more than mere polite¬ ness and hospitality: in a less elevated character I should venture to call it friend¬ ſhip, but here it could only be conde¬ scending goodness. To 187 To finish my account of the music of this charming city, I must observe, that though the composers of the Venetian school are in general good contrapuntists, yet their chief characteristics are delicacy of taste, and fertility of invention; but many circumstances concur to render the music of Venice better, and more gene¬ ral than elsewhere. The Venetians have few amusements but what the theatres afford; walking, riding, and all field¬ sports, are denied them. This in some degree accounts for music being so much, and in so costly a manner, culti¬ vated; the number too of theatres, in all which the Gondoliers have admission gra¬ tis, may account for the superior manner in which they sing compared with people of the same class elsewhere *. And in the private families, into which the girls of * When a box belonging to a noble family is disengaged, and likely to remain empty, the opera manager permits the Gondolieri to occupy it, ra¬ ther than a report should prevail that the perform¬ ance drew but little company. the 188 the Conservatorios marry, it is natural to suppose that good taste and a love for music are introduced. The library of St. Mark here, which abounds with books in all other facul¬ ties, afforded me but few materials on the subject of music. However I gained considerably by the conversation of Sig¬ nor Zanetti, the first librarian, who was very polite and communicative. Printing has been carried on in Venice with great spirit, ever since the year 1459, when it was established there by Nicho¬ las Jansen; and there is perhaps no city in Italy in which so many books have been published. At present the press is very active and fertile, and the number of booksellers in the fine street called Merceria is very considerable. I found in no one place so many old au¬ thors on the subject of music as here; and as to the new, I met with many that I was unable to find elsewhere, particu¬ larly the first volume of Padre Martini s History I 189 Hiſtory of Music. The principal book¬ sellers in Venice are Pasquali, Remondini, Bettinelli, Occhi, and Antonio di Castro. The art of engraving music there seems to be utterly lost, as I was not able to find a single work printed in the manner we print music in England. In the first place there is no such thing as a music shop throughout Italy, that I was able to discover. Indeed M. di Castro, a spirited bookseller, one of the four abovemen¬ tioned, has published a proposal for print¬ ing music with types, in the manner at¬ tempted by Mr. Fought, but has met with small encouragement, having only published one book of little duets and trios. Musical compositions are so ſhort¬ lived in Italy, such is the rage for novel¬ ty, that for the sew copies wanted, it is not worth while to be at the expence of engraving, and of the rolling-press. In¬ deed there, as in Turkey, the business of a transcriber furnishes employment for so many people, that it is cruel to wiſh to rob them of it, especially as that trade 190 trade seems more brisk and profitable than any other. As a supplement to the article Venice, I must add, that, since my return to Eng¬ land, I have been favoured with a letter from thence, dated January 25, 1771, containing the following particulars re¬ lative to the state of music there, at that time. * At the theatre of S. Benetto we * have had represented, during the pre¬ “ sent carnival, the opera of Alexander “ in India; composed by Signor Bertoni, “ master of the Mendicanti, which has *been universally applauded; particu¬ “ Jarly a duet, sung by Signora de Amicis c and Signor Caselli. At the same “ theatre we have at present il Siroe ri- * conosciuto, composed by Signor Borghi, * which is generally disliked. * The music, at the opera-house of S. * Moisè, pleases very much; notwith¬ “ standing it is so ill executed, that the “ author, Signor Garzaniga, a Neapoli¬ “ tan, has great reason to be mortified, “ though crowned with general praise. BOLOGNA. 